---
id: 2
title: Getting Started with GitHub
dueDate: 2024-12-20
---

## What is GitHub?

GitHub is the global standard platform for storing and sharing code. It is based on Git, a version control system that keeps track of changes to your code. We will use GitHub to store the code we write in these exercises so I can see it!

## Primer on Git

Git is based on a few core ideas:

1. **Repositories** are where your code is stored.
2. **Commits** are the changes you make to your code.
3. **Branches** are different versions of your code.
4. **Merges** are the changes you make to your code.

Essentially, you can store one version of your code in a repository in the cloud, and then edit it locally in your own 'branch'. When you are ready to upload your changes, you can commit them to the repository and merge them into a main branch. This is particularly useful for code, where in the process of writing some code you may break it or cause something to go wrong. If some intern (me next summer) was allowed to directly edit the main branch, they could potentially take down the entire system of a giant company.

We work with Git with a few main types of commands in the terminal:

- `git clone <repository>`: Clone a repository from GitHub to your local machine.
- `git add <file>`: Add a file to the staging area.
- `git commit -m "<message>"`: Commit the changes to the repository.
- `git push`: Push the changes to the remote repository.
- `git pull`: Pull the changes from the remote repository to your local machine.
- `git checkout <branch>`: Switch to a different branch.
- `git merge <branch>`: Merge the changes from one branch into another.

It's okay to not know what all of these commands mean right now, I'll explain them as we go along.

## Setting up GitHub

To start our git journey, we need to set up a GitHub account and create our first repository!

1. Go to [GitHub](https://github.com/) and sign up for an account. Our school email will allow us to get a pro account for free, but you can also get a free account with your own email. You can eventually add another email to your account so when we graduate your code stays with you, so make sure to choose a good username (I'm stuck with SuperAce100 for the rest of my life 🥲).
2. Once you have done so, create a new repository called `codingbunny`. Set it to public and initialize it with a README.
3. Now, open a terminal. Navigate to the `coding-bunny` directory we created in the previous lesson and copy the set of commands that is titled **…or create a new repository on the command line**.
4. Reload the page and you should see your new repository with the README file!

## Setting up Git

Now, we need to set up Git on our local machine and connect it to our GitHub account.

1. Open a terminal, navigate to the `coding-bunny` directory (remember, you can use `pwd` to see where you are), and run 
```bash
git config --global user.name "Charlotte Yan"
git config --global user.email "your_chosen_email@example.com"
```
This sets up your name and email to label all commits you make.

2. Now, we can start using Git in the repository we created! Write a poem about capybaras in the readme.md file, save it, and close it.
3. We now need to add the file to the staging area. Run `git add readme.md`.
4. To commit the changes to the repository, we need to add a commit message to let other know what we just did. Run `git commit -m "Your message!!!"`.
5. We have now updated the repository on our local machine, but we need to send it up to GitHub. Run `git push` to push the changes to the remote repository.
6. Reload the page and you should see the your changes and commit!

Congratulations! You have just made your first commit to GitHub! Text me the url of your repository (https://github.com/SuperAce100/codingbunny) when you're done and I'll be able to see the changes you made!
